---
title: "December Progress Update"
path: '/phd-update-dec-2019'
date: "2019-01-12"
featuredImage: "./images/curve_structure.png"  
---

It has been almost three months since I successfully progressed onto the next stage of my PhD and it feels like an appropriate time to reflect on my progress. I write this to myself, to give me a much needed kick into gear and to outline my priorities and objectives in the coming months. 

If I am honest with myself, I haven't been putting in enough hours the past couple of months. I have been struggling to wake up early, struggling to get into a routine and struggling to have the focus that I need to really push on with my PhD. I feel spread like butter over the width and breadth of the identity space - from the cryptographic protocols underpinning anonymous credentials all the way up to user facing application and ecosystem design. This is partly by choice - as a developer I am fascinated by the user facing possibilities and as a maths enthusiast learning the cryptography is magic.  However, without any focus or clear deliverables to anchor me I feel I have drifted and not made the most of my time.

My project proposal, which I summarised in an earlier [post](https://wip-abramson.dev/research-summary), I now realise is too broad and lacks a clear pathway to follow. I am still interested in the core premise - how can we measure these identity ecosystems that we create and use those measurements to gain insights into the ecosystems? And how can these insights influence the governance of these systems? But I need a project to build, something that is mine, something that focuses and directs my learning and research. Hopefully something that I can apply these questions to and get some answers.

With that in mind, my objective for December is to identify and select a project that interests me enough that I can focus on realising it for the remainder of my PhD. By project, I mean predominantly a software development project, I want to learn how to build credential ecosystem and to do that I am going to pick a single ecosystem and focus my effort totally on that. I have a number of candidate projects in mind, and throughout the rest of December I plan to write a project outline for each and evaluate their viability. By January I want to have a clear focus, and assess all work that I do based on how it helps me achieve my single goal.

Time is a precious resource that I have been squandering recently. My attention has been dragged in a number of different directions. I definitely hit a bit of a wall and I hope this can be the start of a new burst of purposeful progress for me.

With that said, I have still achieved some important milestones over the last few months. Key among those are developing an understanding of Hyperledger Aries agents. I still have a way to go before I would feel confident to deploy a custom agent, along with its controller and a frontend interface. However, I have an fairly detailed understanding of how the project is designed. The [aries rfcs](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs) have been an invaluable source of knowledge and I have been playing around with the [aries-cloudagent-python](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-cloudagent-python) code from the government of British Columbia. As a lab we also developed a winning project at a recent hackathon - a demo using Hyperledger Aries secure messaging capability for federated machine learning between credentialed entities. Check out our write up [here](https://medium.com/@adam.hall/diffusion-hackathon-2019-b5dd0c29aab5).

The other major area I have progressed with is my ability to develop cryptographic protocols using Rust. This has been an objective of mine since the start of my PhD basically, but it always seemed far away almost unattainable. However, recently, with the support of the MIRACL team I have been diving into the [miracl-core](https://github.com/miracl/core) codebase. Using this code base I have been able to implement signature schemes for [CL](https://www.iacr.org/archive/crypto2004/31520055/cl04.pdf), [BBS+](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/663.pdf) and [PS](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.699.2251&rep=rep1&type=pdf) signatures, all can be used to create anonymous credentials. While these obviously aren't production ready, it has given me great confidence in translating cryptography papers into code and in understanding other cryptographic implementations - most importantly the production ready [hyperledger ursa](https://github.com/hyperledger/ursa). The next step for me is to implement the proof of knowledge signature capability used by a credential holder to create an unlinkable credential proof. Additionally, I wrote a [getting started guide](https://wip-abramson.dev/miracl-core) here for anyone interested into having a go with the miracl library. Hopefully this should help others get set up and playing with the cryptographic primitives quickly. 

When I write this I feel like hmm, I actually achieved quite a bit. However, I know I have not been as efficient as I could have been and especially not as focused on the PhD objective. The major area I need to improve is on my writing. I need to do some writing every day. I need to write down my ideas, I have a number of half written papers I would love to get over the line and I need to keep refining my literature review. I know that I should do this, but I have been less than good recently. Especially with the literature review, which is decent but can and should be continuously improved.

Still we live and learn. Hopefully writing this is me learning.