---
title: "Do you exist online?"
path: '/existence'
date: "2018-07-26"
featuredImage: "./images/Existence.jpg"  
---
![](./images/Existence.jpg)

What aspect of your digital life truly belongs to you?

What do you use to identify yourself online? Is it yours?

What happens to the data you create online? Can you confidently say that you own
it? Or that you have a say in how it is used?

Currently, your only existence in the digital space is provided to you by a
third party. Your identifiers, most commonly an email address, are not yours.
Not really.

Were Google or Facebook to cease to exist I bet a lot of people would soon think
differently about digital existence.

Think about what you would lose. For me, if I were to lose my Gmail account, I
lose access to my photos and some documents as well as the unique login
identifier for dozens of accounts.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/880/1*wKQE2UHjQzfZqxsWQvQRGA.jpeg)

How is it that the virtual world has become so dominated by a few large
corporations?

When you start to think about these questions you realise that in the cyberspace
we have created independently we are nothing

### Why should you care?

You might be reading this thinking so what? I don’t exist online and why should
I? The online world isn’t real.

Well, I would argue that for a world that isn’t real we sure spend a lot of time
there. The information that can and is being gleaned from our online habits is
both staggering and
[scary](https://medium.com/s/trustissues/find-out-what-google-and-facebook-know-about-you-31d0fa6d7b61).
Not to mention the lax controls on who can use this data and how.

We have seen time and time again that large organisations cannot be trusted to
resist the temptation of using our data to further their goals and increase
their profit margins.

We saw it with the recent Cambridge Analytica scandal where our democratic
process is being subverted through the targeted spreading of misinformation that
proved so effective. Here is a great article explaining this
[threat](https://medium.com/asecuritysite-when-bob-met-alice/the-thought-police-have-finally-arrived-9742765af6ea).

It is possible, for the right price, to know us better than we know ourselves.

Another example of a huge overreach in power is Google’s ability to know where
you have been, where you are and where you are likely to go next. They even
recently
[admitted](https://www.theverge.com/2018/8/17/17715166/google-location-tracking-history-weather-maps)
to tracking phone location even after users turn off location services.

Think about that. One for-profit company has incredible access to your life in
exchange for providing you with a service. Did we really sign up for this?

You cannot deny the benefits that these digital giants have brought us. But by
greedily capturing more and more of our data under the pretence of providing
better services they have become far too powerful.

Not to mention the security issues that arise from massive data silos stored in
centralised databases creating tempting honeypots which hackers are only too
happy to
[exploit](https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/list-of-data-breaches-and-cyber-attacks-in-june-2018-145942680-records-leaked/).

### Another Way

It does not have to be that way. We are slowly moving away from the data farms
and monopolies of today into a user-centric model for both identity and data.
With organisations like [MyData 2018](https://medium.com/@mydataorg) at the
heart of this change.

Self-Sovereign Identity has become the buzzword defining this change and its
principles are outlined expertly by Christopher Allen in this
[post](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html).

But first …

#### What even is Identity?

It is hard to quantify but an identity is something every human being has
regardless of government documentation.

One thing we can say about physical identity in its rawest form is that you
exist without anyone saying you can. You don’t rent you body off some
all-powerful being. Your mind and its thoughts aren’t provided to you. They are
yours!

We can all communicate, build up relationships. Trust people we meet and in turn
be trusted. We don’t have to rely on anyone else to do this.

We have to try and replicate this online.

> Why don’t we exist as our own virtual entities, constantly building up and
> developing our digital presences, connecting and networking with each other
whilst simultaneously creating value and benefiting from it?

Digital identity can be thought of and is explained beautifully in this
[paper](https://t.co/g8Fe2Pzpb3) as a correlation. What actions and information
are you correlated with online. Currently, we are correlated without our consent
by numerous tracking agents. So we neither gain from this correlation or can
control it. In the future, I hope we will be able to do both.

A Self-Sovereign Identity will be at the centre of this change but it is the
applications and protocols that having this identity will enable that excites
me.

### Data

Data is at the heart of this.

If you do not own your own digital data do you own your digital self?

If you do not control your digital data streams are you in charge of your
virtual self.

I am not sure I can say I own much digital data in the same way I own my watch
or my clothes. Nobody other than me knows exactly whats in my wardrobe. My
clothes do not sit in a Google wardrobe waiting for me to request access.

Furthermore, by owning and storing your own digital data you will be far less
susceptible to being hacked. Just like it is very rare someone steals clothes
from your wardrobe but is far more likely they steal from a clothes shop.

Individual stores of data will lack the incentives to hackers that a large store
of personal information provides. While it may seem scary having all your
information in one place, it is the better way. It is time we took
responsibility for our own security.

We have to change how we think about data, how we store it and how we share it.

I believe, it should not be the responsibility of the application to hold data.
The applications job is to build out the identity model to allow individuals to
store their data. Applications in the future will provide interfaces to easily
access and create value from our data without the responsibility or the
temptation that arises when storing massive amounts of user data.

Data is the key to this century. It is our oil and currently, we give it away
for free. In doing so we are stifling the innovation that having open access to
data would undoubtedly create.

Open data markets are coming. Data markets that anyone can take part in and
anyone can get access to information they require. Data markets that no one
controls. [Ocean Protocol](https://oceanprotocol.com/) is looking like a leader
in this field.

We need to level the data playing field ensuring users are at the centre of
their digital data flows and can easily use this data to generate value for
themselves.

Our virtual selves exist in scattered fragmented data silos, where if we do
exist we are merely serfs that are given virtual spaces to exist without being
able to generate value or own it. Where our virtual providers decide what to do
with the value we produce every day and throw us the crumbs. The shiny gadgets,
the new features. We have virtually no say in how our data is really used.

Think of a world where everyone is in control of there own data and can decide
how, where and what it is used for. Free Self-Sovereign Digital individuals
would have the power to “vote” with there data. This will play a huge part in
bringing about a fairer more equal world!

A world where anyone with an idea can put it to the people an either have data
donated or can pay individuals for that data. We need to share the wealth and
innovation that data is going to create or we risk creating a scary dystopian
future.

App developers, web developers anyone dealing with users data should be thinking
about how they can present there data to their users in the most useful way
without relying on storing and exploiting this data for there own gain.

I hope the design question will become how can we adapt their identity so that
they can store the required information themselves.

### Looking to the Future

The world is changing.

Cyberspace, virtual reality, augmented reality. It is all expanding.

We are spending more and more time online, exploring and existing in this
digital world. It is time we as individuals took more control of this space in
which we spend our time.

We need to make sure everyone is benefiting from this expanding real estate and
the value that a digitally interconnected world is creating.

The lines are becoming blurred between what is real and what is virtual.

If we do not stand up to for our digital rights and claim an independent piece
of this space soon we risk losing our freedom all over again.

Can we as a society make this change?

Will governments and large corporations accept this transfer of power to the
individual?

I am not sure but I urge everyone to think about the implications and to explore
the solutions. We are on the brink of a paradigm shift that is going to shape
this century.

A shift that will be driven by data. It is up to everyone of us to make sure
this shift is for the benefit of all, not just a select few.

*****

As recent graduate and software developer I have become increasingly interested
in the implications of blockchain technology and more specifically identity.
This October I will be starting a PhD on Blockchain, Identity and Cryptography
working in the new [Blockpass Identity Lab](https://medium.com/@l.bell_79105) at
Edinburgh Napier University. My aim is to help bring about a transition to a new
Self-Sovereign model for identity online.

